OAuth client implementation advanced guide (#175)
bluesky-social/bsky-docs: docs/advanced-guides/oauth-client.md

---
sidebar_position: 17
---

## OAuth Client Implementation

This is a guide to implementing atproto OAuth clients "The Hard Way". Optimistically, most developers will have an SDK available for their programming language which supports OAuth, and they can simply refer to SDK documentation. This guide is intended for early adopters, SDK maintainers, or developers with more sophisticated OAuth needs. It is agnostic to whether developers are building clients to work the the `app.bsky` microblogging Lexicons, or implementing novel application Lexicons.

> The [atproto OAuth specification](https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/pull/326) is the authoritative document on how to use OAuth with atproto. If there are discrepancies between this document and the specification, defer to the specification. This document skips over a few details and uses more atproto-specific terminology, but readers are still expected to be familiar with OAuth 2 concepts, terminology, and standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [atproto OAuth specification](https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/pull/326) is the authoritative document on how to use OAuth with atproto. If there are discrepancies between this document and the specification, defer to the specification. This document skips over a few details and uses more atproto-specific terminology, but readers are still expected to be familiar with OAuth 2.1 concepts, terminology, and standards.
```

Author: I had this written as "OAuth 2.0/2.1" and shortened it to "OAuth 2" instead. For general devs (the target of this document), i'm worried that referencing 2.1 will be a rabbit hole? It is till a draft, not a standard/RFC yet, and I bet a lot of folks aren't familiar.

I don't have a strong opinion though, I think either/both would be fine, it is a bit subtle.

The PAR request should have `Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded`.

A successful response body will be a JSON object including the field `request_uri` (not to be confused with `redirect_uri`).

### DPoP

Clients must use DPoP to bind auth tokens to a specific client device or server. DPoP nonces, provided by the auth server, must be used.

Clients generate a new DPoP cryptographic keypair for each auth session, and retain the keypair for the duration of the auth session. DPoP keypairs should never be exported or moved between devices, and should never be reused across users or between sessions for the same user. Client must start DPoP at the initial authorization request (PAR).

`ES256` (NIST "P-256") is the cryptographic algorithm/curve which must be supported by all clients and auth servers. Browser Apps should use the WebCrypto API to generate non-exportable keypairs. Other clients may find implementations of this cryptographic system in generic JWT libraries, or in generic cryptographic libraries for their language or environment. DPoP is also increasingly required as part of OAuth profiles and will hopefully be support by generic OAuth libraries.

> DPoP involves setting a HTTP Header (`DPoP`) on every token request and every authorized request to the PDS. The header value is a self-signed JWT. There is random field in the body, and JWTs are generated and signed uniquely for every requests (DPoP JWTs should not be reused between requests).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DPoP involves setting a HTTP Header (`DPoP`) on every token request and every authorized request to the PDS. The header value is a self-signed JWT. There is unique random `jti` field in the body, and JWTs are generated and signed uniquely for every requests (DPoP proofs JWTs cannot be reused between requests).
```

> The server returns the current DPoP nonce in the `DPoP-Nonce` HTTP header in every response. Nonce values may be shared across all users and sessions on the server, or may be scoped to individual users and sessions. Nonces may be shared between access token use (PDS requests) and authorization server requests (PDS or entryway), but they may be distinct servers, so clients should always track DPoP nonces separately for the two uses. Nonces change periodically, with a rotation period chosen by the server. Clients should persist the DPoP nonce for each session, and update the persisted value when a response is received with a different value. If the nonce is missing, or has become outdated, the server will return an HTTP 400 response with JSON body and the `error` field set to `use_dpop_nonce`. The response will include the correct nonce in the `DPoP-Nonce` header, and the client can retry the request. The client discovers the initial nonce for each server by doing this request/error/retry cycle at least once. Servers will usually accept stale/old nonce values for a short time window to reduce errors-and-retries caused by clients making multiple concurrent authorized requests. Ideally the request/error/retry cycle does not need to happen again, though clients should be ready for it at any time (eg, if the nonce has rotated multiple times between requests).

Reviewer: For detecting the `use_dpop_nonce` error, one should use the `WWW-Authenticate` HTTP header, when communicating with the resource server:

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9449#section-9

```
 HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
 WWW-Authenticate: DPoP error="use_dpop_nonce", \
   error_description="Resource server requires nonce in DPoP proof"
 DPoP-Nonce: eyJ7S_zG.eyJH0-Z.HX4w-7v
```

Reviewer: During PAR, the error mechanism, defined by OAuth, is indeed to return an `error` field in the JSON payload.

When making DPoP requests to token endpoint:

> - JWT header fields should be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- JWT header fields must be:
```

---
sidebar_position: 17
---

## OAuth Client Implementation

> This is a guide to implementing atproto OAuth clients "The Hard Way". Optimistically, most developers will have an SDK available for their programming language which supports OAuth, and they can simply refer to SDK documentation. This guide is intended for early adopters, SDK maintainers, or developers with more sophisticated OAuth needs. It is agnostic to whether developers are building clients to work the the `app.bsky` microblogging Lexicons, or implementing novel application Lexicons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a guide to implementing atproto OAuth clients "The Hard Way." Optimistically, most developers will have an SDK available for their programming language which supports OAuth, and they can simply refer to SDK documentation. This guide is intended for early adopters, SDK maintainers, or developers with more sophisticated OAuth needs. It is agnostic to whether developers are building clients to work the the `app.bsky` microblogging Lexicons, or implementing novel application Lexicons.
```

| **SSRF + DoS Hardening** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **Authorization UI** | Browser Redirect  | Browser Redirect  | WebView/Browser |
| `redirect_uri` | App URL (HTTPS) | App URL (HTTPS) | App Link (Android), Universal Link (iOS), or Client-specific URI scheme |

✅: Required

❌: Forbidden

PKCE: Proof Key for Code Exchange ([RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636))

PAR: Pushed Authorization Requests ([RFC 9126](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9126))

DPoP: Demonstrating Proof of Possession ([RFC 9449](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9449))

Client Metadata: OAuth Client ID Metadata Document ([`draft-parecki-oauth-client-id-metadata-document`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-parecki-oauth-client-id-metadata-document/))

Other architectures are possible. For example, a mobile app which uses a web service to mediate client authentication and refresh tokens, or a web service could act as a "Public" client. This guide focuses on the most common use-cases.

OAuth is not currently recommended as an auth solution for for "headless" clients, such as command-line tools or bots.

## Components

> OAuth 2 is a "framework" for designing authentication systems, not a single standard or API to implement. This section describes the standards used in the specific atproto "profile" of OAuth, and components that a typical client will need to implement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
OAuth 2 is a framework for designing authentication systems, not a single standard or API to implement. This section describes the standards used in the specific atproto "profile" of OAuth, and components that a typical client will need to implement.
```

### Client and Server Metadata

> The atproto network is decentralized: there are many independent PDS instances, and many client apps. OAuth needs to facilitate any client app being authorized against any PDS instance, without prior registration or coordination between users, developers, or service operators. The atproto OAuth profile makes this possible by combining public client metadata and public authorization server metadata.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The atproto network is decentralized: there are many independent PDS instances and many client apps. OAuth needs to facilitate any client app being authorized against any PDS instance, without prior registration or coordination between users, developers, or service operators. The atproto OAuth profile makes this possible by combining public client metadata and public authorization server metadata.
```

- **Browser Apps**: "single-page" applications which run in a web browser, implemented using web platform APIs and JavaScript or WASM runtimes. The server-side ("backend") component is minimal, or even just static file hosting.
- **Mobile and Desktop Apps**: what they sound like: "native" apps that run on mobile operating systems (smartphones, tablets, etc), or desktop applications

|                         | **Web Service** | **Browser App** | **Mobile or Desktop App** |
| ---                     | ---             | ---             | ---                       |
| **OAuth 2 Client Type** | "Confidential"  | "Public"        | "Public"                  |
| `client_id` | ✅ URL to metadata | ✅ URL to metadata | ✅ URL to metadata |
| `client_secret` | ❌  | ❌  | ❌  |
| **OAuth 2 Grant Types** | `authorization_code`
`refresh_token` | `authorization_code`
`refresh_token` | `authorization_code`

> `refresh_token` |

Reviewer 3: This section of the table seems off, or maybe I'm just struggling to interpret it!

|                         | **Web Service** | **Browser App** | **Mobile or Desktop App** |
| ---                     | ---             | ---             | ---                       |
| **OAuth 2 Grant Types** | `authorization_code`
`refresh_token` | `authorization_code`
`refresh_token` | `authorization_code`
`refresh_token` |

| **Client Metadata** | ✅ Public Web | ✅ Public Web | ✅ Public Web |
| **Client Metadata JWK** | ✅ Public Web | ❌  | ❌  |
| **PKCE** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **PAR** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **DPoP** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |

> | **Handle Resolution** | DNS and HTTPS | via helper service | DNS and HTTPS or via helper service |

Reviewer 3: "Helper service" could be DNS-over-HTTP, which is something we actually offer an adapter for in our SDK.

| **DID Resolution** | HTTPS | HTTPS | HTTPS |
| **Recommended Client Secret Key Storage** | Environment Variable, Secrets Manager, Hardware Enclave | ❌  | ❌  |
| **Recommended DPoP Key Storage** | Secure Database | non-exportable CryptoKeyPair in IndexedDB | Secure File or Database, Hardware Enclave |
| **Recommended Token Storage** | Secure Database | IndexedDB or LocalStorage | Secure File or Database |
| **SSRF + DoS Hardening** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ |
| **Authorization UI** | Browser Redirect  | Browser Redirect  | WebView/Browser |

> | `redirect_uri` | `https://` App URL | `https://` App URL | Client-specific URI scheme |

Reviewer 3: May want a double-check, but this seems fairly uncontroversial to me:
```suggestion
| `redirect_uri` | `https://` App URL | `https://` App URL | App Link (Android), Universal Link (iOS), or Client-specific URI scheme |
```

https://developer.android.com/training/app-links
https://developer.apple.com/ios/universal-links/
https://bsky.app/profile/krasovs.ky/post/3l2tb4jcq4s22

- `token_endpoint_auth_method` (string, optional): confidential clients must set this to `private_key_jwt`.
- `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` (string, optional): confidential client set this to `ES256`
- `jwks` (object with array of JWKs, optional) or `jwks_uri` (string URL, optional): confidential clients must supply at least one public key in JWK format for use with JWT client authentication.

And some optional (but recommended) metadata fields:

- `client_name` (string, optional): human-readable name of the client
- `client_uri` (string, optional): not to be confused with `client_id`, this is a homepage URL for the client. If provided, the `client_uri` must have the same hostname as `client_id`.
- `logo_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to client logo
- `tos_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to human-readable terms of service ("ToS") for the client
- `policy_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to human-readable privacy policy for the client

Here is an example Browser App client metadata file, that would need to be hosted at https://app.example.com/oauth/client-metadata.json (served with Content-Type `application/json` and HTTP status 200, no redirects):

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```json
```

{
  "client_id": "https://app.example.com/oauth/client-metadata.json",
  "application_type": "web",
  "client_name": "Example Browser App",
  "client_uri": "https://app.example.com",
  "dpop_bound_access_tokens": true,
  "grant_types": [
    "authorization_code",
    "refresh_token"
  ],
  "redirect_uris": [
    "https://app.example.com/oauth/callback"
  ],
  "response_types": [
    "code"
  ],
  "scope": "atproto transition:generic",
  "token_endpoint_auth_method": "none"
}
```

> PDS (and entryway) instances also publish public JSON documents containing authorization server metadata.

Reviewer 3: This is the first instance of the term "entryway", folks may be confused by it.  If this document is for folks already familiar with OAuth, should we spell out that in our system a "resource server" is a PDS and an "authorization server" is called an entryway.  We could also just call them an AS?

> The PDS publishes a "protected resource metadata" file at the well-known HTTPS path `/.well-known/oauth-protected-resource`. This contains a field `authorization_servers` with an array of URLs indicating the authorization server location (the origin or "issuer"). This might be the PDS itself (same origin), or it might be a separate "entryway" service in large multi-PDS deployments. The authorization server metadata endpoint is `/.well-known/oauth-authorization-server`. The response includes the following fields relevant to clients:

Reviewer 3: A PDS may also just want to defer these responsibilities to an auth provider more specialized to the task.

The PAR request is submitted to the `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint` (from server metadata), and must use `Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded`.

A successful response body will be a JSON object including the field `request_uri` (not to be confused with `redirect_uri`).

### DPoP

Clients must use DPoP to bind auth tokens to a specific client device or server. DPoP nonces, provided by the auth server, must be used.

Clients generate a new DPoP cryptographic keypair *for each auth session*, and retain the keypair for the duration of the auth session. DPoP keypairs should never be exported or moved between devices, and should never be reused across users or between sessions for the same user. Client must start DPoP at the initial authorization request (PAR).

> `ES256` (NIST "P-256") is the cryptographic algorithm/curve which must be supported by all clients and auth servers. Browser Apps should use the WebCrypto API to generate non-exportable keypairs, which can be stored in IndexedDB to persist across browser sessions (not to be confused with OAuth sessions). Other clients may find implementations of this cryptographic system in generic JWT libraries, or in generic cryptographic libraries for their language or environment. DPoP is also increasingly required as part of OAuth profiles and will hopefully be support by generic OAuth libraries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ES256` (NIST "P-256") is the cryptographic algorithm/curve which must be supported by all clients and auth servers. Browser Apps should use the WebCrypto API to generate non-exportable keypairs, which can be stored in IndexedDB to persist across browser sessions (not to be confused with OAuth sessions). Other clients may find implementations of this cryptographic system in generic JWT libraries, or in generic cryptographic libraries for their language or environment. DPoP is also increasingly required as part of OAuth profiles and will hopefully be supported by generic OAuth libraries.
```

A good way to mitigate these issues is to use or implement a hardened HTTP client. It should set appropriate timeouts and resource limits, validate URLs, and check that resolve domain names don't point to protected or local IP addresses.

## Authorization Flow

### Account or Server Identifier

Clients can start an auth flow in one of two ways:

- starting with an atproto account identifier: handle or DID
- starting with a server URL or hostname (PDS or entryway)

One use case for starting with a server URL instead of an account identifier is when the user does not remember their full account handle or only knows their account email. Another is for authentication when a user’s handle is broken. The user still needs to know their hosting provider in these situations.

When starting with an account identifier, the client must resolve the atproto identity to a DID document. If starting with a handle, it is critical (mandatory) to bidirectionally verify the handle by checking that the DID document claims the handle (see atproto Handle specification). All handle resolution techniques and all atproto-blessed DID methods must be supported to ensure interoperability with all accounts.

> In some client environments, it may be difficult to resolve all identity types. For example, handle resolution may involve DNS TXT queries, which are not directly supported from browser apps. Client implementations might use alternative techniques (such as DNS-over-HTTP) or could make use of a supporting web service to resolve identities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some client environments, it may be difficult to resolve all identity types. For example, handle resolution may involve DNS TXT queries, which are not directly supported from browser apps. Client implementations might use alternative techniques (such as DNS-over-HTTPS) or could make use of a supporting web service to resolve identities.
```
